feat: Add standard attribute/property definitions (#1091)
patternfly/patternfly-elements: docs/content/develop/properties.md

+++
title = "Define properties"
description = ""
weight = 45
draft = false
bref = ""
toc = true
menu = "develop"
tags = [ "develop" ]
+++

Property definitions provide a standard, streamlined way to maintain state within your component, receive external input (via attributes), initialize values, trigger handler functions, and more.

## Introduction

To introduce the topic, consider a "Counter" component that counts how many times something has happened.  Such a component could define a counter like this.

```javascript
static get properties() {
  return {
    count: {

>       type: Number,

Reviewer: Can you add cascade definition too?

>       type: Number,

Author: The doc now explains how camelCase gets converted to snake-case, and cascade.

      default: 0
    }
  };
}
```

Defining `count` in this way brightens your day in the following ways:

 - **A property**: The property's name is `count`, so `this.count` is created and initialized to the default value, the number `0`.  
 - **An attribute**: An attribute, `pfe-c-count` is also created, and will be kept in sync with `this.count`.  The `pfe-c-` prefix is explained [below](#prefix).

Below, all the options for property definitions are explained.

## Property / attribute binding

As mentioned in the introduction, defining a property also creates an attribute, and the two values will be kept in sync.  For properties with the String type, this is straightforward.  Attribute values are always strings, and so logic is needed to 

### Handling `null`

> If a property is assigned to null, the associated attribute will be removed.

Reviewer: If you leave off the `default` setting, is it setting the property to `null`?

Example: `this.count = null` will result in `this.removeAttribute("pfe-c-count")`.

## Type

> Three property types are supported: String, Number, and Boolean.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Three property types are currently supported: String, Number, and Boolean.
```

^ Since this may evolve or expand in the future

### String

```
name: {
  type: String
}
```

### Boolean

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Though all attribute values are technically strings, if you are assigning a `true/ false` paradigm or checking that a variable exists (implicit `true/false`, i.e., `hidden` or `required`), please assign that property a type of `Boolean`.  This will ensure the update and injection of that value is handled correctly by the base class.
```

Author: I left a note in your similar suggestion for Number. Looking forward to your thoughts.

Reviewer: Added my thoughts to that thread, let me know.  I think the additional information is extremely helpful.

### Number

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to boolean, though attribute values are strings, if you are assigning a numerical value to your attribute, please use this type for your property.  Consider the use-case of `tabindex` for example.  This will output a quoted string when assigned to the attribute but use a numerical type when you query for the property.
```

Is this an int or does this support floats?

Author: It uses JS's built-in Number type, which is a floating point type, but floats can represent integers.  That's mentioned, but kind of buried, in the note about precision.  I feel like the name "Number" implies that any kind of number is supported (within the precision limits), but I'm fine with making it explicit if you think it would help.

Author: It uses JS's built-in Number type, which is a floating point type, but floats can represent integers.  That's mentioned, but kind of buried, in the note about precision.  I feel like the name "Number" implies that any kind of number is supported (within the precision limits), but I'm fine with making it explicit if you think it would help.

About the paragraph encouraging contributors to use `type: Number` for storing numbers, I feel like that would fit perfectly in a guide.  I see this doc as something like API docs, describing all the things you can do and how they work, whereas describing what you _should_ do would fit better in a guide, such as "Creating your first component" or "Adding typed properties to your component".  Does that make sense?  What do you think?

Reviewer: Since we don't really have a guide yet outside of these docs, maybe we can insert it here for now and pull it out into the guide when we're building it?

Example: `this.count = NaN` (or `Number.NaN`) will result in `pfe-c-count="NaN"`.

## Default

> During the component's `connectedCallback`, values specified as defaults will be initialized in both properties and attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the component's `connectedCallback`, values with defined defaults will be initialized in both properties and attributes.
```

> Example: since `count` has a default of `0`, when the component is connected, it will have `this.count === 0` and `this.getAttribute("pfe-c-count") === "0"`.

Reviewer: Unless the user has `pfe-c-count=3`?

Author: Good catch!

## Observer

> You may choose to provide an `observer` for any property, which is the string name of a (non-static) function which will be called whenever the property changes.  Here's an example wherein changes to the `count` will trigger the `handleCount` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may provide an `observer` for any property, which is the string name of a (non-static) function inside the web component which will be called whenever the property changes.  Here's an example wherein changes to `count` will trigger the `handleCount` function.
```

Author: :+1:

```js
class PfeCount extends PFElement {

  /* some boilerplate omitted */

  static get properties() {
    return {
      count: {
        type: Number,
        observer: "handleCount"
      }
    }
  }

  handleCount(oldVal, newVal) {
    console.log(`count changed from ${oldVal} to ${newVal}`);
  }

}
```

Observer functions are called with arguments `(oldVal, newVal)`.  Like property values, both arguments will be cast to the appropriate type, ie String, Number, or Boolean.

> Note, `observer` is driven by the `attributeChangedCallback` on the `PFElement` class, so if you choose to provide your own `attributeChangedCallback`, you _must_ call `super.attributeChangedCallback(attr, oldVal, newVal)` within it.  The best practice is to not provide an `attributeChangedCallback`.

Reviewer: Are there any other vanilla web component functions that are overridden when using this property definition approach?  `attributeChangedCallback`...`observedAttributes`?  And should we mention the deprecation of `cascadingAttributes`?

Reviewer: What about getters and setters?  Should we mention that too?

Author: To clarify, `attributeChangedCallback` and `observedAttributes` don't get overriden by using this approach.  They are defined on the base class, and an element author can override them if they choose to.  An element which defines its own `observedAttributes` is overriding the `observedAttributes` that implements the properties system.

I personally don't think it's worth mentioning `cascadingAttributes`.  It's only ever been used in two elements, so I don't think many contributors know or think of it much.  My preference would be to mention it in the changelog or release notes, but not the docs about how things work now.

}
```

Example: since `count` has a default of `0`, when the component is connected and wasn't given a `pfe-c-count` attribute already, one will be created with the default value `0`.  In other words, `this.count === 0` and `this.getAttribute("pfe-c-count") === "0"`.

## observer

Default: `undefined`

Observers provide a quick way to wire up a function to be called whenever a value changes.

You may provide an `observer` for any property, which is the string name of a (non-static) function inside the web component which will be called whenever the property changes.  Here's an example wherein changes to `count` will trigger the `handleCount` function.

```javascript
class PfeCount extends PFElement {

  /* some boilerplate omitted */

  static get properties() {
    return {
      count: {
        type: Number,
        observer: "handleCount"
      }
    }
  }

  handleCount(oldVal, newVal) {
    console.log(`count changed from ${oldVal} to ${newVal}`);
  }

}
```

Observer functions are called with arguments `(oldVal, newVal)`.  Like property values, both arguments will be cast to the appropriate type, ie String, Number, or Boolean.

## cascade

Default: `undefined`

> `cascade` allows an attribute value to be automatically copied to one or more child elements.  The value of `cascade` is a CSS-style selector which is used to match the children that should receive the values.  The selector is applied to the element's children in both the light DOM and the shadow DOM.

Reviewer: Does this accept any selector?  Could I do: `"cascade": "*"` for example?  Or `"cascade": ":not(.foo)"`

Reviewer: Asked directly and the answer was yes!  Anything querySelectorAll accepts.

> `cascade` allows an attribute value to be automatically copied to one or more child elements.  The value of `cascade` is a CSS-style selector which is used to match the children that should receive the values.  The selector is applied to the element's children in both the light DOM and the shadow DOM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`cascade` allows an attribute value to be automatically copied to one or more child elements in the Light DOM or Shadow DOM<sup>[1]</sup>.  The value of `cascade` is a CSS-style selector which is used to match the children that should receive the values.  The selector is applied to the element's children in both the Light DOM and the Shadow DOM.

<sup>[1]</sup> There is not a way to target _only_ the Light DOM or _only_ the Shadow DOM.  If this is necessary, we recommend adding a unique identifier to the Shadow DOM elements and making use of the `:not` selector.
```

**<pfe-foo>**
```javascript
static get properties() {
  return {
    foo: {
      type: String,
      cascade: "h1,h2,h3"
    }
  };
}
```

With this property definition, any `h1`, `h2`, or `h3` children will get the same attribute and value, such as:

**Before connectedCallback**
```html
<pfe-foo foo="hello">
    <h1></h1>
</pfe-foo>
```

**After connectedCallback**
```html
<pfe-foo pfe-c-foo="hello">
    <h1 pfe-c-foo="hello"></h1>
</pfe-foo>
```

Attribute values are only copied from parent to child, never the other way around.

## prefix

PatternFly Elements has a convention of prefixing a component's own attribute names with `pfe-c-`, and the `prefix` field controls that.  Attributes are prefixed by default, but you may set `prefix: false` if you wish your attribute to have no prefix.

This can be useful when depreacting old, non-prefixed attributes.

```javascript
static get properties() {
  return {
    ariaHidden: {
      type: String,
      default: "true",
      prefix: false
    }
  };
}
```

The property name `ariaHidden` results in an attribute named `aria-hidden`.  If prefix were not set to false, the generated attribute name would be `pfe-c-aria-hidden` instead.

> Note: [ARIA attributes](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.1/#state_prop_def) must be defined as Strings, for even though attributes like `aria-hidden` seem like booleans, they are not true boolean attributes, and they only accept values of `"true"` and `"false"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: [ARIA attributes](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.1/#state_prop_def) must be defined as Strings, for even though attributes like `aria-hidden` seem like Booleans, they are not true boolean attributes (`aria-hidden` vs. `aria-hidden="true"`) and need to receive string values of `"true"` and `"false"`.
```

## alias

Default: `undefined`

The `alias` field can be used to link two properties to each other.  `alias` expects to be given the name of another property, to which it will copy its value.  When a property value is changed, if it has an alias, the new value will be sent to the alias.

> Aliasing is intended to help when migrating to a new property/attribute name.  It allows for two different properties to be simultaneously "active".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aliasing is intended to help when migrating to a new property/attribute name.  It allows for two different properties to be simultaneously "active".

Aliased values do not need to have a new set of definitions for cascade or observer as those states will be managed by the attribute to which it is being aliased (see example below).
```

+++
title = "Define properties"
description = ""
weight = 45
draft = false
bref = ""
toc = true
menu = "develop"
tags = [ "develop" ]
+++

Property definitions provide a standard, streamlined way to declare the properties and attributes your component needs.  Property definitions provide the following features:

 - Two-way binding between property and attribute values.
 - Default value initialization.
 - Data types (for properties).
 - Observer function to be run when a value changes.
 - Optional namespacing prefix for attribute names.
 - Aliasing properties to one another, for phased deprecation.
 - And more!

## Introduction

> To introduce the topic, consider a component that counts how many times something has happened.We can give it the tag `<pfe-count>` and a `count` attribute (`<pfe-count count="0">`) to set the initial count.  We might also want a local property `this.count` for convenient referencing and updating of the count (ex: `this.count += 1` vs `this.setAttribute(this.getAttribute("count") + 1)`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To introduce the topic, consider a component that counts how many times something has happened. It may have a tag of `<pfe-count>`, and a `count` attribute (`<pfe-count count="0">`) which sets the initial count.  We might also want a local property `this.count` for convenient referencing and updating of the count (ex: `this.count += 1` vs `this.setAttribute(this.getAttribute("count") + 1)`).
```

Author: Sounds good!

A property definition for `count`:

```javascript
static get properties() {
  return {
    count: {
      type: Number,
      default: 0
    }
  };
}
```

With this property definition for `count` we get:

 - **A property**: The property's name is `count`, so `this.count` is created and initialized to the default value, the number `0`.  
 - **An attribute**: An attribute, `pfe-c-count` is also created, and will be kept in sync with `this.count`.  The `pfe-c-` prefix is explained [below](#prefix).

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> And many other options for watching the property for changes, deprecating attributes, and more.  All the options for property definitions are explained below, but first, a bit about how property/attribute pairs are synchronized.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - And many other options for watching the property for changes, deprecating attributes, and more.  
 
All the options for property definitions are explained below, but first, a bit about how property/attribute pairs are synchronized.
```

## default

Default: `undefined`

During the component's `connectedCallback`, values with defined defaults will be initialized in both properties and attributes.

```javascript
count: {
  type: Number,
  default: 0
}
```

Example: since `count` has a default of `0`, when the component is connected and wasn't given a `pfe-c-count` attribute already, one will be created with the default value `0`.  In other words, `this.count === 0` and `this.getAttribute("pfe-c-count") === "0"`.

## observer

Default: `undefined`

Observers provide a quick way to wire up a function to be called whenever a value changes.

You may provide an `observer` for any property, which is the string name of a (non-static) function inside the web component which will be called whenever the property changes.  Here's an example wherein changes to `count` will trigger the `handleCount` function.

```javascript
class PfeCount extends PFElement {

  /* some boilerplate omitted */

  static get properties() {
    return {
      count: {
        type: Number,
        observer: "handleCount"
      }
    }
  }

  handleCount(oldVal, newVal) {
    console.log(`count changed from ${oldVal} to ${newVal}`);
  }

}
```

> Observer functions are called with arguments `(oldVal, newVal)`.  Like property values, both arguments will be cast to the appropriate type, ie String, Number, or Boolean.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Observer functions are called with arguments `(oldVal, newVal)`.  Like property values, both arguments will be cast to the appropriate type, i.e. String, Number, or Boolean.
```

## alias

Default: `undefined`

The `alias` field can be used to link two properties to each other.  `alias` expects to be given the name of another property, to which it will copy its value.  When a property value is changed, if it has an alias, the new value will be sent to the alias.

Aliasing is intended to help when migrating to a new property/attribute name.  It allows for two different properties to be simultaneously "active".

Aliased values do not need to have a new set of definitions for cascade or observer as those states will be managed by the attribute to which it is being aliased (see example below).

Example, an `old` property whose values will be forwarded along to a `new` property.

```javascript
static get properties() {
  return {
    new: {
      type: Number,
      default: 0,
    },
    old: {
      type: Number,
      alias: "new"
    }
  };
}
```

With these property definitions, changes to `old` will be "forwarded" along to `new`.

```javascript

> el.source = 4;

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this example, should these say: 
```
el.old = 4;
el.new === 4; // true
```

Reviewer: This is using a setter so if you want to update the value of a property you just set it like a variable.

Author: Good catch, I changed the property names to `new` and `old` but forgot to update the code example.

> el.source = 4;
> el.destination === 4; // true

Author: ```suggestion
el.old = 4;
el.new === 4; // true, because setting el.old caused the value to be copied into el.new
```

```

> Two-way aliases are allowed.

Reviewer 2: I'm unsure of why you would use a two-way alias?

Author: What's important is that two-way aliasing doesn't fail catastrophically.  It would be very easy for it to become an infinite loop.  "Support" for two-way aliasing means not falling over dead when it's done.

But for the sake of argument, two-way aliasing could be used to keep two attributes in sync with each other, and that could be useful.  For example, let's say we're integrating a component with some third-party library or framework, and that integration required a framework-specific attribute.  We should not lock in to that attribute, so we create our own custom attribute that aliases to the framework-specific attribute, _and back_.  That way, we can keep on supporting our own custom attribute even if we remove that integration or add another integration.

```javascript
static get properties() {
  return {
    a: {
      alias: "b"
    },
    b: {
      alias: "a"
    }
  };
}
```

## attr

Default: `undefined`

The `attr` field overrides the property's default generated attribute name and specifies a custom name to be used as this property's bound attribute.

```javascript
static get properties() {
  return {
    foo: {

>       attr: "the-one-and-only-foo"

Reviewer 2: it could totally just be me but this feels unclear as to which thing is the new source of truth, or the new attribute, is it `foo` or `the-one-and-only-foo`

Reviewer 2: I also don't know when I would use this approach vs. setting an alias

Author: For the alias question, you set an alias when you want to copy a value from one prop/attr to another.  It has nothing to do with attribute names.

Reviewer 2: Not sure if this is new or I just missed it the first time but the line below this is great, maybe you can just move it above the example?

"The example below shows a property definition which results in a property named `foo` and an attribute named `the-one-and-only-foo`.

    },
  };
}
```

This property definition results in a property named `foo` and an attribute named `the-one-and-only-foo`.

`attr`, along with `alias`, are primarily intended to help when migrating to a new property/attribute name.  It allows for two different properties to be simultaneously "active".

When using `attr`, `prefix: false` is implied, meaning that there will never be a [prefix](#prefix) added to an attribute name specified with `attr`.

## title

Default: `undefined`

The `title` field defines a human-friendly title for the property, which will be used to label the property's form fields in the Storybook-powered demo site.

## observedAttributes & attributeChangedCallback

> Property definitions are driven by PFElement's attributeChangedCallback and observedAttributes.  Due to this, any PatternFly Element using property definitions should not define an attributeChangedCallback (use [observer](#observer) instead) or observedAttributes (attributes created by property definitions are automatically observed).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Property definitions are driven by PFElement's `attributeChangedCallback` and `observedAttributes`.  Due to this, any PatternFly Element using property definitions should not define an `attributeChangedCallback` (use [observer](#observer) instead) or `observedAttributes` (attributes created by property definitions are automatically observed).
```

## type

Default: `String`

Three property types are currently supported: String, Number, and Boolean.

Defines the data type for the property.  Values are stored in attributes as Strings, but are cast into the specified type when accessed via the property.

### String

To store a string, create a property definition with `type: String`.

```javascript
name: {
  type: String
}
```

Valid values: any string, `null`, and `undefined`.
Though all attribute values are technically strings, if you are assigning a `true/ false` paradigm or checking that a variable exists (implicit `true/false`, i.e., `hidden` or `required`), please assign that property a type of `Boolean`.  This will ensure the update and injection of that value is handled correctly by the base class.

> ### Number

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

### Number

```

Aliasing is intended to help when migrating to a new property/attribute name.  It allows for two different properties to be simultaneously "active".

Aliased values do not need to have a new set of definitions for cascade or observer as those states will be managed by the attribute to which it is being aliased (see example below).

Example, an `old` property whose values will be forwarded along to a `new` property.

```javascript
static get properties() {
  return {
    new: {
      type: Number,
      default: 0,
    },
    old: {
      type: Number,
      alias: "new"
    }
  };
}
```

With these property definitions, changes to `old` will be "forwarded" along to `new`.

```javascript
el.old = 4;
el.new === 4; // true, because setting el.old caused the value to be copied into el.new
```

Two-way aliases are allowed.

```javascript
static get properties() {
  return {
    a: {
      alias: "b"
    },
    b: {
      alias: "a"
    }
  };
}
```

## attr

Default: `undefined`

The `attr` field overrides the property's default generated attribute name and specifies a custom name to be used as this property's bound attribute.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The example below shows a property definition resulting in a property named `foo` (i.e., js: `this.foo`) and an attribute named `the-one-and-only-foo` (i.e., html: `<pfe-foo the-one-and-only-foo>`).
```

```javascript
static get properties() {
  return {
    foo: {
      attr: "the-one-and-only-foo"
    },
  };
}
```

> This property definition results in a property named `foo` and an attribute named `the-one-and-only-foo`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
